[MUSIC PLAYING]
>>LISA GARR: Do you feel
that your memory is not
as good as it used to be?
Did you know that
Alzheimer's can begin decades
before symptoms appear?
The good news is that you
can preserve and improve
your high-level thinking
skills by taking
charge of your brain health.
But time is of the
essence, and joining
me is Dr. Ilene Naomi Rusk.
She's trained as a
neuropsychologist
and clinical neuroscientist,
and is the co-director
of the brain and behavior
clinic where she developed
the Healthy Brain Program.
Welcome.
>>ILENE NAOMI RUSK:
Thank you so much.
Happy to be here.
>>LISA: So tell me a
little bit about how
you got started with this,
way back before you started
the Healthy Brain Program.
>>RUSK: Let me tell you a little
story of actually how I really
got started.
When I was about 15 years old,
I had a very scary experience.
I was in a cabin in
northern Ontario,
and that cabin was
struck by lightning.
And I saw the walls sort of--
as close as you are to me right
now, I saw the wall come down.
And there was footing in
the water in this lake,
and I was shocked.
I was electrocuted.
And days after that, I had
very strange thoughts and--
>>LISA: The wall came down?
>>RUSK: Yeah, the
wall of the cabin,
I actually saw it come down.
It was burnt and it came down.
So I was on a metal bed
and I got electrocuted.
>>LISA: Oh, my goodness.
>>RUSK: It was super scary.
I know.
>>LISA: No, it's traumatizing.
>>RUSK: Yeah.
I didn't feel--
I felt like I had
my first near-death
experience at that time.
>>LISA: Was it kind of an
out-of-body experience?
>>RUSK: Yeah.
It was an out-of-body
experience.
And I felt at that moment,
and this is the key point,
that I lost my mind
in that experience
because my brain must have
changed so much because
of the electrical change.
>>LISA: Wow.
>>RUSK: So several days
went on and on and on,
and I was like [GASP].
I was hallucinating.
I had visions and images.
It subsided, but I
remember, first of all,
thanking the universe.
The little that I knew about
the universe or divine power
at that time, I knew that I
was kept on this side of life
for a reason.
>>LISA: How old were you?
>>RUSK: I was young.
It was in my teens.
>>LISA: Did anyone get
help for you after that?
Or you had to kind of
go through this alone.
>>RUSK: No, no, no.
It was Northern Ontario.
It was pretty remote.
It was like a
summer camp setting.
And that's why I became
kind of interested
in the mind and the brain.
And I felt like I don't want to
be out of control of my mind.
I don't-- so it was almost fear
of wanting to not lose my mind
and have an intact brain
that developed my passion.
>>LISA: It's so
interesting because I've
had a near-death
experience as well,
and I find that people
with near-death experiences
or out-of-body
experiences, commonly
detached slightly
from the brain,
and observe the
brain and the person.
So we the being, we the brain,
are observable to each other.
>>RUSK: Yes.
>>LISA: It's
fascinating, isn't it?
>>RUSK: Yes.
I love that you
said that, actually,
because there's
a way that that's
a self protective mechanism.
And so sometimes it happens
and it's not adaptive,
and it's called dissociation.
And so if you have a trauma and
you separate from the trauma,
then it's those people and those
experiences that never really
join together.
And there's always a
sense of separation
between self and self,
if you know what I mean.
>>LISA: True.
>>RUSK: Yeah.
So there's a healthy way of
separating and not suffering
the intensity of the moment.
>>LISA: And there's
an unhealthy way.
>>RUSK: Exactly.
>>LISA: Staying stuck
in the disassociation,
which you see quite
often, and that
is labeled as mental illness.
>>RUSK: So often.
It's a root cause.
Let's talk about root causes
because yes, you're right.
>>LISA: And mental illness
has become in our awareness
so much as an epidemic now.
I don't know if it's
always been there
and it's now more reported
on, or if it really truly
is on the rise because of
our stressful conditions
that we live in now.
It's probably both.
So let's talk about that and
the rise of Alzheimer's, as we
spoke about in the
beginning of the show.
What are the current numbers--
I think that it's in the
millions-- of people in the US
that are diagnosed with
Alzheimer's, in the US alone?
>>RUSK: Just the US?
I think we're close to 6
million, like, 5.7 million.
>>LISA: Wow.
>>RUSK: I have a
slide, a recent slide,
I think, from maybe the
Centers for Disease Control
that there's a big
concern that it's growing.
Indeed, it is growing.
In England, I just
read that's the first--
first-- leading cause of death.
So it's a tsunami of concern
around cognitive decline.
It doesn't all end up as
Alzheimer's, but there's
a whole subset of
people who are actually
just with cognitive decline
and haven't been diagnosed yet.
>>LISA: I'm glad you told that
story because that's exactly
the way many of us feel.
You forget your keys.
You can't remember a
conversation you had
with someone, and it's scary.
>>RUSK: It is.
>>LISA: Because you're
afraid of your own mind.
>>RUSK: That's
exact-- and you're
afraid of losing your mind.
I mean, I think
really a lot of us
are afraid of losing our minds.
And I think the more we
talk about it over the show,
the more we'll maybe just start
to tease apart what is memory
and what is self, because I
have some questions about that
myself, as I've been in this
field for over 30 years.
>>LISA: Oh, that's fascinating.
>>RUSK: It's interesting.
>>LISA: We do know that this
has become a moral issue.
Eventually, down the line, if
this continues to increase,
it's going to become a financial
burden on us and, of course,
as caregivers.
And my mother's in this position
right now, being a caregiver,
and it is very, very stressful.
And more and more
people are going
to be in that position
yes as we go on.
>>RUSK: Wow.
Is she supported?
Because I think the key
is support for caregivers.
We have some sad
and scary statistics
that caregivers suffer an
increased burden for risk
for dementia themselves.
>>LISA: Why?
>>RUSK: Well, there
are many, many reasons.
There's just speculation now.
It could be that when
you're just a caregiver,
think about your mom.
Is she taking care of herself?
>>LISA: No.
>>RUSK: I'll go
through the list.
Is she sleeping well?
Is she eating well?
Is she loved and
supported by a lot
of friends on a regular basis?
>>LISA: She's turning
all that away.
>>RUSK: There you go.
Is she cognitively stimulated?
See, this is a key thing.
So that's another key thing.
>>LISA: Yes.
She looks for things
that are interesting.
Yes.
And she dives into it because
she loves my dad so much.
>>RUSK: Totally.
>>LISA: But it is very
true that caregivers,
even sons and daughters
of aging parents,
it is very challenging.
And at the same time,
the aging parent
doesn't want to be a burden.
And so it's a loop where
we do need to address it.
So first of all, is
our mental challenges
and Alzheimer's genetic?
>>RUSK: Mm-hmm.
>>LISA: Are they?
>>RUSK: I think I'll have
to separate them out.
So let's talk about
Alzheimer's disease.
We know now that we
inherit from our mothers
and we inherit from
our father's genes.
Right?
Most of Alzheimer's disease that
is called familial Alzheimer's
disease is very, very focused in
very few families in the world,
maybe several hundred
families in the world.
That's familial
Alzheimer's disease.
It has a very strong
genetic component.
So that means that--
I would hope it wouldn't
be in your family,
but if it was in your
family, it would mean,
most people would have
it, and you'd know.
It would be aunts and uncles
and mothers and fathers.
And it's called an
early onset gene,
so you people get it early in
those very select families.
That is a very different
Alzheimer's disease
than what most people
in a general population
are concerned about.
In the general
population, there is
a gene that's marked for late
onset Alzheimer's disease, as
opposed to the early onset, and
it's APOE, Apolipoprotein E,
and you either get a 2, a 3,
or 4, but you get two of them.
So you can get a 2 and
a 3, or a 3 and a 3.
I'm a 3 and a 3.
We don't know what you are.
>>LISA: If you have a
predisposition for Alzheimer's.
>>RUSK: Yes.
So the APOE 4 is
the concerning one,
and your risk increases if
you have two copies of APOE 4.
That's the worthwhile
information.
That's something that we should
know that about ourselves.
We should know, if we
have an increased risk,
not to be worried
but to be proactive.
>>LISA: And it's an
easy test, right?
>>RUSK: It's very easy.
It's one of the--
I won't mention necessarily
specific companies,
but very easy test of
just a swab in your mouth.
And you send it to the
company and they'll tell you.
>>LISA: You can find out
all you have this APOE gene.
>>RUSK: Yeah, exactly.
Exactly.
And if you have two copies, your
increased risk is significant.
If you only have one copy,
and it's an APOE 3, 4,
your risk is a little bit
greater than a 3, 3, like me,
but it's still an
increased risk.
>>LISA: Would we want
to know or would it--
>>RUSK: Good question.
>>LISA: --actually program us?
What do you think?
>>RUSK: No, I think
that's kind of key.
It's how fearful are we, how
hesitant are we to find out
because we don't
want to be afraid,
and we don't want to think
that we're pre-programmed
or predestined to.
But we are living in such rich
times of information now, Lisa.
Oh my goodness.
>>LISA: Good.
>>RUSK: There's
so much you can do
if you do know that
it's almost like,
what a great chance
to get empowered.
>>LISA: That's a
great perspective.
>>RUSK: You know
what I'm saying?
>>LISA: Yes.
>>RUSK: I mean, it's
just huge right now.
>>LISA: That's a
great perspective.
>>RUSK: We're lucky.
I've watched this
whole field start
with the smallest tiny little
drugs looking for a solution,
and failing, failing, failing.
Drug companies have
failed 99% of the time
to find any single targeted
medicine for Alzheimer's
or cognitive decline.
But we have so many
other things we can do.
>>LISA: And this is why you
have the Healthy Brain Clinic.
>>RUSK: Exactly.
>>LISA: So if you
have these, maybe,
predisposed for this
gene, there are many ways
to activate and deactivate
the gene, right?
>>RUSK: Perfect.
>>LISA: OK.
So what are some of the
risk factors in the way
you activate this gene?
And then we're going
to talk about the ways
that you don't activate it.
>>RUSK: That's really smart.
And I think some
of it's intuitive,
but I also want to emphasize
that everything I'm
going to say now, I'm
educating all of us.
I'm educating myself
as I go along.
I'm educating communities.
I'm educating you.
And this is really
for the purpose
of empowering other people to
find out for themselves what's
possible for them in their
lives, what's doable,
what's not overwhelming,
and also what's out there.
So the science says this.
Your sleep is very important.
We do not take that
nearly seriously enough.
>>LISA: How much sleep?
Eight hours, six hours?
>>RUSK: The key
is if you can get
consistent sleep, that's great.
Yep, usually between
seven and eight.
And it's consistent sleep.
So it means you
need to find out--
or if you're really snoring
badly, doctors in our clinic
say go get a test
for sleep apnea
to see if you're actually
really sleeping during the night
or not sleeping.
What the brain does during sleep
is it clears some of the toxins
that build up in the brains
of people with Alzheimer's.
It clears them out.
>>LISA: Really.
>>RUSK: Yes.
>>LISA: It detoxifies
itself at night?
>>RUSK: Yes.
>>LISA: That is exciting.
>>RUSK: Isn't it?
>>LISA: Yes.
>>RUSK: So we have this little,
like, garbage collection
system that works when you're
sleeping on your side at night,
so let's use it.
>>LISA: On your side?
>>RUSK: Yeah.
>>LISA: Specifically.
>>RUSK: So there's
a little bit of data
that says if you're
sleeping on your side,
then you activate your
glymphatic system.
You know you have a lymphatic
system in your body?
Well, our brains have
a glymphatic system
for glial cells, and so
it's called glymphatic.
But yeah, it's a little
garbage collection
system that's active at night.
>>LISA: Perfect.
Body's so intelligent.
>>RUSK: I know.
>>LISA: OK.
So then getting plenty
of sleep, eating probably
the correct foods
is a good idea.
What other things though
would prevent or activate
this Alzheimer's gene?
>>RUSK: Well, what
would activate
it would be a lot of sugar.
See, I've never been asked
the question in this way,
so I love it.
I'm asked about
what deactivates.
But really, what
activates it would be--
>>LISA: We need to know.
>>RUSK: --the SAD diet,
the Standard American Diet.
Saturated fats, like a lot of
fried food, no sleep, a lot of
loneliness.
If you're really-- yeah,
a lot of loneliness.
And--
>>LISA: I thought that SAD
stood for Sugar Alcohol Dairy.
>>RUSK: Oh, that's funny.
That's great.
>>LISA: It's true.
I mean, those things
also cause inflammation.
>>RUSK: That's right.
>>LISA: So other things that
would cause inflammation, sugar
as well.
What does inflammation
do to the brain
in order to activate
this Alzheimer's gene?
>>RUSK: Let's back
up because you
touched on a really important
point about inflammation.
Yes, the standard American
diet is pro-inflammatory,
and there are many
things in our lives
that are pro-inflammatory.
And what's happened-- recently,
there's been some very exciting
new discoveries in the
last four or five years,
that it's actually many
contributors are responsible
for the onset of a degenerative
disease like Alzheimer's.
And one of the categories,
one of the root causes,
for why that might
happen is inflammation.
So that would be like a category
of why someone might have it.
Another is the sugar sensitivity
that you spoke about,
and that sugar and insulin
start to wreak havoc.
Another is, do we have
enough support in our bodies
like hormone support?
How's our thyroid doing?
These are some of the things
that our doctors look at.
And as you know, there's
some risk factors as well.
So it's the inflammatory
subtype, the glycotoxic,
which is very sugar
sensitive, diabetes related.
You've heard Alzheimer's disease
referred to as type 3 diabetes
sometimes?
>>LISA: Yes.
>>RUSK: And then there's
the hormone related.
>>LISA: Yeah, I
actually haven't.
Type 3 diabetes is
Alzheimer's related?
>>RUSK: Well, because of the
great involvement of sugar
and how the body ends up--
how sugar ends up to
be toxic, actually.
>>LISA: OK.
So that would be
considered type 3.
>>RUSK: Glycotoxicity,
that's right.
Actually, that's 1.5, but
it doesn't really matter.
But it is one of the subtypes,
as Dr. Bredesen calls it.
>>LISA: Fascinating.
So we've talked about
some of the risk factors
and some of the things
that-- and this could also
go for mental illness,
though, right?
>>RUSK: That's a
very good point.
I mean, it's a leap.
But I don't know the genetic
literature well enough
on mental illness,
specifically, but I
do know that they're very,
very strongly interrelated
and that if you have a
history of mental illness,
for example, like
chronic depression,
then the key regions
in your brain that are
responsible for memory shrink.
For example, the hippocampus--
I don't know if you've ever
heard of the hippocampus.
It's a very, very
small region, but very
responsible for memory
consolidation and memory
in general.
And so people who have
chronic depression or PTSD
have changes in the reach same
regions of the brain-- and this
is something I'm very
passionate about,
the relationship between mental
illness and brain changes,
and then the possible
risks that you
have for these neurodegenerative
diseases, which
I think is a very big deal.
That's not talked about enough,
really, as a risk factor.
>>LISA: So you mentioned that,
that memory has a lot to do
with--
the memory and the
brain are very related,
and that has to do
with mental illness.
>>RUSK: Yeah.
Well I think that the way I
put it together is region.
one particular region of the
brain that ends up shrinking
is the hippocampus, and it
tends to shrink when you have
very, very chronic depression.
And let's look at it like
money in a bank account.
If your hippocampus is already
very small from depression,
then if you're going
to have more loss,
you're going to
have more likelihood
of getting Alzheimer's disease.
>>LISA: But which
one starts first,
just to make this very
relatable to people--
>>RUSK: You're right.
>>LISA: If people have tough
lives and tragic events happen,
that causes the memory
center to want to deactivate
and that's how you get
into the mental illness?
Is that the way
that it would go?
>>RUSK: That's actually very
interesting way to put it.
I think that the
best way to explain
it is that everyone who
has chronic depression
is looking for ways to feel
a great sense of relief
for themselves, and that
the right therapies actually
can improve the size of the
hippocampus with depression.
>>LISA: Fascinating.
>>RUSK: So that
gets into-- yeah.
Our brains are really
plastic, and there's
a great deal of hope.
>>LISA: Well,
that's good to know.
I mean, that's fantastic.
So you can actually do
a lot more to repair--
not to reverse, but to really
repair and be proactive here.
>>RUSK: That's right.
>>LISA: What about
the idea of getting
older and memory decline?
Is that true?
Does it have to be true?
>>RUSK: That's important.
It's important
because we do all--
cognitive decline
is part of aging.
But in the model
that we work in,
if you're looking
for root causes
and you're approaching
imbalances in the body, then
you don't have to
have cognitive decline
as readily as we do now.
So if you're taking
care of the sugar load
and you're taking
care of inflammation
care of your exercise,
and you're socially stimulated
and cognitively stimulated,
what I say is there's so
much you could do to prevent.
But yes, the brain
changes as you age.
>>LISA: It does.
>>RUSK: Some people
say you get more wise.
There's a neuropsychologist who
wrote a book called "The Wisdom
Paradox."
And I do think that
our brains may change
and we may lose
certain details, but we
may grow another kind of
awareness and intelligence
that actually--
>>LISA: Makes us wiser.
>>RUSK: --serves us.
That's right.
>>LISA: That's fantastic.
That's good.
So speaking about
research, there's
a lot of research
that's come out.
Specifically, you
work with a doctor
that talked about some research
that came out about 2014,
which is relatively new.
What is the work
of-- is it doctor--
>>RUSK: Bredesen.
>>LISA: Bredesen.
>>RUSK: That's right.
The reason that
was so pioneering
is because prior to that,
we'd been really focused
on finding a silver
magic bullet medicine.
And I told you already that the
big pharmaceutical companies
have not succeeded at all.
There are several
medicines that are used now
that don't modify the
course of the illness at all
and they do not cure
the illness at all.
>>LISA: There's
a lot of research
going into this, a lot of
funding, a lot of money.
>>RUSK: So much money.
I read a statistic yesterday
that this country has spent
$1.9 billion in 2018 to
find a drug for Alzheimer's.
I know, staggering.
I know.
>>LISA: In one year?
>>RUSK: One year.
So I just imagine
where that money
could have been used if I
had had it or you had had it.
>>LISA: Well what
would you do with it?
>>RUSK: I would definitely
do more shows like this.
I would do education programs
for exercise and aging.
I would publicly
fund programs that
were food related in schools.
I'd teach kids how to meditate.
I'd teach parents
how to parent, how
to raise a child with a
healthy nervous system.
>>LISA: So a whole new
model would emerge.
>>RUSK: Exactly.
But what Dr. Bredesen did,
just to get back to that,
is he spent 30 years as a
research neurologist at UCLA
and the Buck Institute
on Aging in California.
Actually, we were
trained by him.
And he said, boy, this factor
plays into Alzheimer's disease.
Oh, this metabolic change
And he accumulated decades'
worth of metabolic changes
and perturbations that are
imbalances that contribute
to Alzheimer's disease.
So rather than looking at
like one particular thing,
he researched all the many
things that contributed.
And he created a model--
this inflammation, this
GI, stomach, dysbiosis,
sugar sensitivity, all kinds
of very technical things that--
>>LISA: Socialization.
>>RUSK: So then
there are the other
there are the
metabolic risk factors,
and then there are the
other risk factors.
I call them the external
environmental factors,
like exercise, socializing,
connecting with your own mind,
being stimulated,
wanting to grow.
>>LISA: And knowing
that the brain is,
as you say, plastic, what does
that mean, neuroplasticity?
I don't think the brain is like
a giant Tupperware container.
It actually changes.
>>RUSK: That's right.
Yeah, that's right.
Well, this actually was a
neuropsychologist, Donald Hebb,
Canadian, like me.
OK and a long time ago.
He said a phrase that is now
coined as neurons that fire
together wire together.
You've probably heard that.
>>LISA: Yes, yes.
>>RUSK: So that was an
interpretation of his teaching.
And his teaching was that, gee,
if you use this pathway a lot,
this pathway will be
used and well greased.
And if you don't use that
pathway, then it won't be used.
So I think we had ideas
about neuroplasticity
a long time ago, but we're just
starting to implement them now
as we're becoming more aware
of brain health and use them.
So neuroplasticity is
the brain's ability
to change and be flexible,
depending upon its environment.
And I want to emphasize
the difference
between internal environment
and external environment.
External environment is
you and I connecting.
We're engaged with each
other, we're learning.
And internal environment is my
thinking, my negative thinking,
whether or not I rest my body
and my mind and my brain,
so more the internal factors,
how I process the world.
Do I know how to rest?
How do I use my
mind and my brain?
How do I think?
Am I stressed?
Does my nervous
system rest and know
how to go into a
relaxation response?
Those are all good things.
>>LISA: But so much of
our world is those things
you just mentioned.
It's constant stress response.
It's fast paced.
There are so many distractions.
We don't sleep well.
There are a lot of
things that come--
how do you suggest with
the Healthy Brain Program
to deal with these
stressors in life?
Because they're not going away.
>>RUSK: Yeah, and I just
don't see that it's only--
I see that it's a much bigger
question, like you're asking.
It's an important question
because it's not just
the Healthy Brain Program.
It's like, how are we
all going to change
our awareness of our
brain and our brain health
when we go home knowing
that we have four devices,
we have blue light at night.
We have kids who are on
their phones all the time,
we don't need to do
mental math anymore.
So you know what I'm saying?
I remember my grandfather
who did mental math.
He used to do columns
of five numbers
and just add them up,
add them up, add them up.
>>LISA: No.
We have devices now.
>>RUSK: Exactly. ?
So what does that mean.
It means we're not
using our brain power.
>>LISA: The math part
of our brain, at least.
>>RUSK: That's exactly right.
>>LISA: But there's also,
to use a good thing,
there's apps like the Calm
app and these types of apps.
>>RUSK: There's
so many good apps.
>>LISA: They're huge.
>>RUSK: That's right.
>>LISA: And so many
people are using them.
>>RUSK: Yeah.
I think it's great.
The big answer to your question
is, how can we simplify?
That's the question reworded.
How do we simplify?
How do we rest, recover
from all the stimulation,
and not get overload?
>>LISA: What do you do?
>>RUSK: I make sure that
I put pauses into my day.
I move my body every single day.
I put pauses into my
day so I'm meditating,
but I'm also just stopping.
And everyone who
knows me would say,
you don't do too much of that.
But I actually do.
I have quiet time alone.
I make sure I move
my body in very
like interesting and
engaged ways in nature.
A brisk walk is
great for your brain.
That's easy.
>>LISA: So driving in
traffic doesn't really count?
Darn, doesn't count?
>>RUSK: If you're listening
to Calm on your app
or you're listening to Insight
Time or the last of it.
>>LISA: I wouldn't
even have time
to do that while I'm driving.
But quite often, I do get in
the car and I shut the door,
and it's quiet.
[INTERPOSING VOICES]
>>LISA: --refuge, yes.
And I don't turn the radio on.
Yeah, why does the
brain need that break?
What does it do in that time?
>>RUSK: Well, rest
and relaxation
are equivalent to safety.
Rest and relaxation are
equivalent to safety to me,
and that's how the nervous
system understands it, too.
And I think we're really
engaged in a threat response--
>>LISA: Constantly.
>>RUSK: --very often
with our bombardment.
So it's almost like changing
an ethic around simplicity
and welcoming rest.
People worry about not doing
because there's so much value
in doing, but valuing the
regenerative rest, not just
in sleep but just in the pause.
>>LISA: So you're going
to have imbalances,
but there's a way to
correct the imbalances.
And you're saying
take the pause.
>>RUSK: Yeah, I think
that's very important.
I mean, from as our
external factors,
we can do that as a pause.
Internally, I think
it's really important
to have a great physician who's
on your side with prevention
tools.
And if you can get a
functional medicine doctor, all
the better, who
integrates root cause
and checks out all of
the root causes in terms
of your metabolism,
and says, wow, we
can balance this
out internally--
your gut, if you have mold,
if you have inflammation.
We can balance these things out
to make your cognition better
and just to make your
overall nervous system relax
a bit more.
>>LISA: I think
it's fascinating.
You're the first
person that I've
heard that says that mental
illness has a root cause, many
of them.
>>RUSK: Right.
Oh, yeah.
Yeah, thanks for reinterpreting
it that way, but I do.
I also really see that
mental illness has a lot
to do with early, unresolved
developmental trauma
and childhood trauma.
And I just encourage--
I myself feel like that's been a
very important part of my life.
And the people
who I love, I feel
like that's part of
the healing journey,
for us to just know where
we came from and just
begin to do the healing
and repairing in this life,
in this body.
>>LISA: Is that what's
neuropsychotherapist does?
>>RUSK: Yeah.
Well, specifically,
a neuropsychol--
I've integrated these things.
I've integrated trauma and
the health of the brain
and the health of
cognition in my own way.
But neuropsychologists
look at cognition.
They look at thinking.
They look at the brain,
different aspects of thinking,
different categories
of thinking.
And I don't think most people
know that our thinking is
divided into categories.
We think about
memory, primarily.
Like, you mentioned your keys.
That's a memory thing.
But actually, maybe
it's not a memory thing.
Maybe it's a sensory
overload thing
because you were doing a
few too many things at once.
So indeed, it was an attention
thing and a focus thing,
just as an example.
>>LISA: Totally.
>>RUSK: So sometimes people
worry about their memories,
but it may not be
their memories.
>>LISA: Yeah.
It might just doing too much.
>>RUSK: That's right.
>>LISA: I'm also a huge fan
of neurofeedback and EEG
and those types of technologies.
They're not invasive their
nonmedical-- or medicine.
>>RUSK: That's right.
>>LISA: And they
really are effective.
But why don't they
have the credibility
that some of the medicines have?
I mean, are they
not studied enough?
>>RUSK: Oh, just
recently neurofeedback
has been studied so much.
And we're starting
to incorporate it
into our clinic
for mild cognitive
impairment along with some other
kind of fun and cool devices.
But you're right.
Neurofeedback didn't have the
credibility for a long time,
and that was partly
a licensing thing
and who was able to do it.
So there were, in the
early days, people
doing it, who may not have
had certain trainings.
But they're so much more
effective now, the trainings,
and it really has a
good research base now.
So for example
with neurofeedback,
I'm collaborating with
someone on a neurofeedback
trial with infrared light with
Parkinson's disease patients
and Alzheimer's patients.
So it is being used in clinical
trials now for memory problems,
for cognitive decline, and
for things like Parkinson's.
So it's got a lot
more credibility now
in terms of the research.
>>LISA: Oh, it's fascinating.
It just teaches your brain
how to self regulate.
>>RUSK: That's a
really good point.
It does.
>>LISA: And the more your
brain trains that, as you said,
the more neurons fire
together they wire together.
>>RUSK: That's right.
>>LISA: If it can train
your brain to self regulate,
and it forms a pattern,
then it gets you off
of your old habit pattern.
>>RUSK: And the brain
learns a new pattern.
>>LISA: It's good for a
traumatic brain injury,
and for trauma, early
childhood trauma.
>>RUSK: But I recommend
people get diagnosed well.
And I think part of the reason
something like neurofeedback
may not have worked consistently
for all those years is
because maybe people weren't
getting diagnosed properly.
So if you see a
neuropsychologist
first or a neurologist firs,
and you're getting diagnosed
and you know what you're
dealing with-- it's
kind of like getting
diagnosed with,
instead of just knee pain,
you're getting diagnosed with,
oh, you have an infection.
Now I know how to
treat your knee pain.
It's not a torn tendon it's
almost like finding out
the good diagnosis first before
you decide what the treatment
intervention is.
And then neurofeedback
has amazing utility.
>>LISA: So there's so many
things that we can do,
and we've talked a little bit
about the cognitive training.
We've talked a little
bit about diet.
Exercise you mentioned.
What else can we do?
>>RUSK: I want to
talk a little bit more
about the cognitive
training, if that's OK.
>>LISA: Yeah.
>>RUSK: Just because
we didn't cover some--
I like to make a prescription
for cognitive training.
So we have enough data now
from the National Institutes
of Health and
National Institutes
of Aging and the FINGER study.
These are huge studies,
with thousands of subjects
over long periods of time.
>>LISA: What is
the FINGER study?
>>RUSK: The FINGER study is
a big study from Scandinavia,
and they modified
a lot of things
in people's environments.
So did the National
Institutes of Aging
study called the ACTIVE study.
They modified a lot of things
in people's environments
like their exercise and
their cognitive training
and various things,
and they showed
what worked to delay cognitive
decline, so things that
really helped.
So cognitive training,
I could prescribe it.
I could prescribe it to you.
You should go to an
online program that--
if it's OK if I name it
right now, the one we use
is the Posit Science one, and
train yourself 15 to 20 minutes
several times a week
on particular tasks
so that your brain learns--
just like with neurofeedback
but in a different way.
Your brain learns to
work more quickly.
>>LISA: Wait.
Goes through this because
this is fascinating.
You do what?
You pause?
>>RUSK: Oh, it's
called Posit Science.
And you can go online and you
can learn particular tasks
that improve your memory,
that improve your attention
and concentration, that
improve your visual and spatial
functioning, that
might improve something
called speed of
information processing.
>>LISA: Wow.
>>RUSK: And speed of
information processing
is just like what
it sounds like.
It's the speed that
your brain goes at.
And if you want to
preserve your memory,
it's good to train your speed
of information processing.
And that's what those studies
that I just told you about--
specifically, the National
Institutes of Aging
ACTIVE study.
If you increase speed of
information processing-- and so
everyone can do this at home.
Just go to that
website, you just
train three, four times a week
>>LISA: These are the brain
games that you can do.
>>RUSK: Totally.
>>LISA: How fun.
And you can do them, and
you can play with them
or whatever on your device.
>>RUSK: Simulate, that's right.
That's right.
>>LISA: And it really
does improve the memory.
>>RUSK: It was
called Posit Science.
>>LISA: Like P-A-U-S-E?
>>RUSK: Oh, P-O-S-I-T.
>>LISA: Oh, OK.
>>RUSK: Posit.
Oh, pause it.
That's funny.
>>LISA: Yeah, because
you mentioned the pause.
So after you do something
stimulating like that--
and this is my question-- do
you need a relaxation response
to something like that?
Or if you have a
very stimulating day,
do you need some
type of a relaxation
at the end of your day?
>>RUSK: Oh, I would
say absolutely.
That's the best.
But after these
brain games, you know
what the research is showing?
>>LISA: What?
>>RUSK: Exercise is really good.
You get your brain going
and then you exercise.
Or you exercise and then
you get your brain going.
I can't remember what
the research shows.
But if you pair your exercise--
>>LISA: With the brain.
>>RUSK: --with the brain games,
they're getting more blood to--
I don't really know
the data on that.
But I do know if you
pair them, exercise
with cognitive stimulation,
you get a big boost--
>>LISA: Fascinating.
>>RUSK: --in those
brain growth factors
and all the good
fertilizers in your brain.
>>LISA: Well, if we're going
to learn more about this,
we're going to take
a look at this video
here about neuroplasticity.
Take a look.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>>NARRATOR: Not so long
ago, many scientists
believed that the brain did not
change after childhood, that it
was hardwired and fixed by
the time we became adults.
But recent advances in
only the last decade
now tell us that this
is simply not true.
The brain can and does
change throughout our lives.
It is adaptable like plastic,
hence neuroscientists
call this neuroplasticity.
How does neuroplasticity work?
If you think of your brain as a
dynamic, connected power grid,
there are billions of
pathways on roads lighting up
every time you think,
feel, or do something.
Some of these roads
are well traveled.
These are our habits, our
established ways of thinking,
feeling, and doing.
Every time we think
in a certain way,
practice a particular task,
or feel a specific emotion,
we strengthen this road.
It becomes easier for our
brains to travel this pathway.
Say we think about something
differently, learn a new task,
or choose a different emotion.
We start carving out a new road.
If we keep traveling
that road, our brains
begin to use this pathway
more, and this new way
of thinking, feeling, or
doing becomes second nature.
The old pathway gets used
less and less and weakens.
This process of rewiring
your brain by forming you can
and weakening old ones is
neuroplasticity in action.
The good news is that we all
have the ability to learn
and change by
rewiring our brains.
If you have ever
changed a bad habit
or thought about
something differently,
you have carved a new
pathway in your brain
and experienced
neuroplasticity firsthand.
With repeated and directed
attention towards your desired
change, you can
rewire your brain.
>>LISA: That is a very
encouraging video.
And the people from Sentis sent
it to, which is really nice.
That you could have a chance
to actually make a change--
people who have parents
with Alzheimer's, it's
very, very challenging.
When they look at the
parent that they've
had their whole life
and all of a sudden,
they don't even recognize their
own children, that is so hard.
>>RUSK: So sad.
>>LISA: That's very hard.
>>RUSK: So hard.
And there's so much of it now.
It's just a real tragedy.
>>LISA: But to tell people that
there are ways that they can
actually start to go after root
causes and make some changes,
maybe not for the parent that's
already into the full-blown
Alzheimer's--
>>RUSK: You're right.
>>LISA: --but for them, as we
talked about earlier, your fear
of possibly losing your
mind and what you can really
do about it, and
that there are things
that you can do about it.
>>RUSK: Exactly.
>>LISA: And now all these
things that we've talked about--
social engagement,
I want to touch
on that a little bit more.
And you're saying
that people that
have maybe cognitive
decline or to avoid it,
it's important to
engage socially.
>>RUSK: That's right.
>>LISA: Like what?
>>RUSK: This is like as you're
even asking me the question,
this is healthy living.
This is just good,
healthy living.
>>LISA: It's not your phone.
It's human.
>>RUSK: That's right.
It's connecting.
So there's so many ways
to engage socially.
And the early research of
Dean Ornish, the heart guy,
he was the first guy.
I heard him talk and he said,
just once a week, bowling
or Bingo with your
buddy is going
to help your heart disease.
So it turns out what's
good for your heart is
good for your brain.
>>LISA: Oh, that's great.
>>RUSK: Yeah.
So really, if you take
care of your heart,
you're also taking
care of your brain.
And one of those things is
that regular social contact,
social engagement.
And it just feels so good
and so inspiring to connect
with someone who you meet
eye to eye, face to face,
something you love
doing together.
And it turns out that setting
regular social engagement times
and interacting is very, very
stimulating for the brain.
The brain is so social.
We might not think of it
that way, because it's just--
>>LISA: Our brain.
>>RUSK: --ours.
Right.
But in fact, it's constantly
wanting to interact.
And there's a whole field called
interpersonal neurobiology
that's--
I think it was Daniel Siegel
the psychiatrist's term.
But there's a yearning
for us, from a brain point
of view, for us to connect.
>>LISA: And it's not necessarily
through watching television.
>>RUSK: No.
>>LISA: It's got to be
personal interaction.
>>RUSK: That's right.
And I'd say that watching TV
is solitary, not interactive.
>>LISA: What about interacting
on Facebook and Instagram
and so forth?
Is that also considered
social interaction?
>>RUSK: Well, right now
I would say that it is.
But it's not like
moving your body.
It's not like
talking to someone.
I would think that
there's going to need
to be more research
that studies,
is that indeed social
engagement the way
you and I are doing right now?
It's different.
>>LISA: Oh, yeah.
We're constantly
mapping, and there's
different parts of the brain
exactly are lighting up.
>>RUSK: Exactly.
>>LISA: The memory center
and the activation,
all sorts of things.
You probably know them.
>>RUSK: That's right.
>>LISA: So it's important
to have that as well.
>>RUSK: That's right.
And to take a walk.
>>LISA: And people that
are not well, that maybe
have an illness or looking at
not only cognitive decline,
but physical
decline, have studies
shown that that really
actually helps somebody better?
>>RUSK: Yes, it really does.
Breast cancer survivors--
I think you could make a
brush stroke across the board.
Social connection--
and I'm talking
about positive
social connection,
and there's a difference
because, unfortunately,
so many of us live in
situations that aren't
as warm and fuzzy for us.
So it's really good
to remember that we
can shift some of
those relationships
with a little bit
of work and create
more peace at home or peace with
those difficult relationships.
>>LISA: This is really
important to know
because so much
of our population
is in the aging category.
And as we go into rest homes
or senior care centers,
not to forget the aging person.
And there's a lot of
senior abuse and things
that happen because our
aging population tends
to be cast aside.
The traditions that
we used to have
with elders living
with rest is not
so much in the modern family.
>>RUSK: I'm so on your page.
I totally agree.
>>LISA: But also
there's conveniences
and inconveniences.
So what would-- we have
hectic busy lives, too.
So how do you suggest
that, when you
do have time with your
elder, your parent
or your grandparent,
what can you
do rather than just sitting and
watching television together
to actually stimulate each
other's interaction and brain?
>>RUSK: Yeah.
Well, it depends really
on how well you know
the person who you're with.
But if it's a family member,
you can also inquire.
Together, you can make it a
really fun and enjoyable thing
to do.
Like, what can we find
together now to do?
It might be a puzzle.
It might be--
>>LISA: Coloring.
>>RUSK: That's right.
It might be coloring
books together,
and just parallel
play like our kids do.
It might be if they're
very physically active--
like, I do yoga with my mother.
>>LISA: Oh, that's great.
>>RUSK: And I engage with her
because she's really physical,
so we engage a lot
physically together.
But it's almost an opportunity--
as you ask the question,
it's an opportunity
to engage and to find out more
about the person who you're
wanting to engage with and ask.
Say, what is it
that you love to do?
What can we do together now
that we haven't done together
that would be challenging
for both of us?
>>LISA: And that's important.
I did that with my dad.
We bought coloring
books, and it's
fun just to do the little
detailing together.
Even though there's
not much said,
there's a certain just
social interaction
that really happens.
>>RUSK: Yeah, there's a
magic also that happens.
>>LISA: Yeah, there
are absolutely is.
>>RUSK: When you just
connect that way,
you don't necessarily
have to talk much.
>>LISA: And this could
also be for someone
that has had, maybe, a stroke.
>>RUSK: Mm-hmm.
>>LISA: Right?
>>RUSK: Yeah.
>>LISA: You have an
experience with a friend who--
>>RUSK: That's right.
That's right.
>>LISA: --who had a stroke.
>>RUSK: Yeah.
She had a stroke in a
part of the brain that's
responsible for speaking, and
she had a Broca's aphasia.
Broca's area was
affected, and that
was just one of the things that
was really severely affected
with her.
Her name's Elisa, and she
totally gave me permission
to talk about her.
>>LISA: Nice.
>>RUSK: But she had
a very severe stroke,
and she's recovering.
It's only been months, actually.
>>LISA: Wow.
>>RUSK: She's doing a really,
really great job of recovering.
And she was a fabulous
artist, and she's still
a fabulous artist, but her
art has really changed.
And she just did a tour
of her studio and a show,
and she showed me the
performers and the afters.
So this is a good example,
really, of neuroplasticity,
as you ask about it.
Neuroplasticity is
the brain's ability
to shift and change
according to need
and according to environmental
factors, internal and external.
That's our definition together.
And she used to make art
that was extremely detailed.
It was just very focused
on specific colors
and detail, tiny,
tiny brush strokes.
And the way she describes
her art now, post stroke,
is she says it's like wabi sabi.
It's just twisted
and not as detailed.
I personally find it
more appealing to me,
as someone who loves art,
because it's abstract.
It's not as representational.
>>LISA: So before,
it was the fine art
skills which we see in this
photo right of the waterfall.
And then afterwards, it was the
way she perceives everything.
>>RUSK: Exactly.
So that would be a
waterfall, but more abstract,
less representational.
>>LISA: So I could see the
waterfall in the second photo.
Oh, that's interesting.
So that's the way that she
would perceive the waterfall,
as something that would be--
>>RUSK: That's right.
>>LISA: --wild and
loud and crazy.
>>RUSK: That's right.
Yeah.
So she might have had
the same ideas when
she was painting or similar
ideas when she was painting
both images, but it came
out completely different
because that part
of her brain that
was the fine detail-oriented
one wasn't working anymore.
So her brain adapted and is
using a different region now.
>>LISA: Fascinating.
>>RUSK: Yeah.
>>LISA: So in terms
of post-stroke--
and we do hear, statistically,
that you can improve
post-stroke--
but there are certain
things that you need to do.
And some of these cognitive
exercises, I think,
are imperative, right?
>>RUSK: That's right.
I think stimulation,
whether it's your body--
I think the research shows--
it's not my area of expertise,
but rehabilitation with
all of our patients--
and many have had
head injuries, too--
is practice and
challenge yourself.
And I like to say
to my patients,
stretch yourself, but
don't stress yourself.
So that means.
Imagine that your brain
is working overtime,
but you don't get to a point
where you have like persistence
stress because
then, again, you're
building up toxins you don't
want like cortisol and--
there's a fine balance
between stretching yourself
and stretching your brain.
>>LISA: Yes.
There is a fine balance.
What does cortisol
do to the brain?
>>RUSK: It serves as a toxin.
>>LISA: It is.
>>RUSK: Yeah.
So what we don't
want is we don't
want to get into that
perpetual threat response.
And so hopefully we're
monitoring that for ourselves,
that we're not in
threatening situations.
And I know it
sounds silly, but--
>>LISA: We are, yeah.
>>RUSK: --we're always in
threatening situations.
It's just realistic.
So then it's also
possible to learn.
There's so many you know,
as you said, so many apps,
so many calming techniques.
So many of us are in
a mindfulness arena
where we have access to
practice, just to notice,
just to begin to notice
when were in hyperarousal.
>>LISA: And that does
happen, but then there's
also the relaxation response.
Right?
>>RUSK: Yeah.
>>LISA: Does that
naturally happen
after the brain goes
into a stress response?
It naturally goes into
a relaxation response?
>>RUSK: Well, if you
recover from your stress,
the idea is that recovery
feels good for your brain.
So yes, you become relaxed.
>>LISA: But does
it automatically
happen in the brain?
>>RUSK: Yes, in the
body and the brain.
Once you-- let's say I met
with something very, very scary
and I dealt with it
really, really well.
I either said,
oh, I'm so scared,
or, you shouldn't
have done that.
I dealt with it
at the time, then
it doesn't become a
prolonged stressor
because I didn't feel
helpless in that moment.
And I was able to kind
of work with the thing
that made me feel threatened.
That's the big difference.
So yes, then you go into that
safety response, going, oh,
yeah, I'm totally fine.
That saber-toothed black
Jaguar is not going to eat me.
So then you do go into
that relaxation response.
But if it's persistent,
then you don't as easily
go into a sense of safety.
>>LISA: You never get the
chance to since the brain--
>>RUSK: That's right.
>>LISA: --is constantly
getting the toxicity--
>>RUSK: Hello, perfect.
>>LISA: --of the
effect of the stress.
Now, what type of person comes
to the Healthy Brain Clinic?
What did they come there for?
>>RUSK: They come because
they have memory problems.
>>LISA: Memory.
>>RUSK: They come because
they took the wrong exit
off the highway and
they're like, I just
didn't remember this exit
that I take 634 times.
And I'm just getting it
wrong every time now.
I don't know why my visual
spatial sense is off now.
So people come because of all
kinds of thinking problems.
And I almost want to tell
you what neuropsychologist
look at in terms of
thinking categories
so we could know
it for ourselves.
There's memory, but then
memories divided into memory
many, many categories like
remote memory, recent memory.
And then there's learning.
You have to learn
before you remember.
And then there's our visual
system and our spatial systems.
Neuropsychologist look
at that, and attention
and concentration,
that sort of thing.
>>LISA: Visual and spatial, how
is that impairing the brain?
>>RUSK: Well, sometimes
if you have a certain type
of neurodegenerative illness--
and some people start like
this with Alzheimer's disease,
having visual spatial
problems-- then
they're not really
sure about maybe
they're not sure
of right or left.
Or maybe they're not
sure of how to get home
even though they've
taken the same route
home their whole lives.
They're like, I've always
gone to that grocery store.
I cannot figure out why I can't
figure out how to get there.
And sometimes, you
know from having
talked about your experience
with a brain injury,
sometimes people who
have brain injuries have
visual spatial problems as well.
>>LISA: The issue
with brain injuries
is they often go untreated.
Once a brain injury
happens, people
don't really understand because
you withdraw after a brain
injury, very commonly,
and don't reach out
to let anyone know there
might be a problem because you
don't know there's a problem.
>>RUSK: That is
the big, big risk.
>>LISA: And the family
members can't understand
why they can't relate
to you the same way,
or why you have these
sudden fits of rage
because your brain
is swollen, or it
doesn't comprehend the way
that it used to or respond
or react to stress
the way they used to
because of the swelling.
The slightest
swelling in the brain
can cause so much tension
and pressure that's
not supposed to be there.
>>RUSK: That's exactly right.
That's right.
>>LISA: I've been a big
proponent of brain trauma
since I had one, and
I've really spoken
with people that don't remember
they had a brain trauma.
They might have knocked
their head on a cabinet
or they had an accident they
didn't go to the hospital for
and they really never treated.
Or they slipped and fell and
hit their head on the floor,
but they're OK.
>>RUSK: Right.
>>LISA: It's definitely
something that needs to be
looked at--
>>RUSK: I know.
>>LISA: --and studied.
>>RUSK: And you've recognized
that sometimes people just hit
their heads and
they just let it go,
and they don't do
anything about it.
And they don't really realize--
what we see a lot
of are patients
who've had concussions.
They don't really realize
they had a concussion,
but then weeks and months
later they're just like,
something is just not right.
They may have just
had a whiplash
injury that affected them.
>>LISA: But does it
eventually get better?
Or by doing these
cognitive training skills,
it gets better faster?
>>RUSK: Each person--
I mean, the whole point--
>>LISA: Different.
>>RUSK: That's right.
And the whole point of
what we're talking about
is, as you've said,
this is personalized.
This is very individualized.
What you need is different
from what I need,
and what I might
need is, depending
upon where our areas
of growth need to be
or where are areas
of weakness are,
or brain damage for someone
who's had a brain injury.
So yeah, people need
personalized treatment.
And yes, we do
help people who had
concussive injuries, mild
traumatic brain injuries,
traumatic brain injuries.
>>LISA: What about Alzheimer's
patients who are on medication?
Can you also still treat them?
>>RUSK: Mm-hmm.
Mm-hmm.
Dr. Bredesen and our doctors do
not generally take people off
of anything that's
been prescribed
until there's very
good evidence or it's
been done very, very slowly.
And the whole idea is the
functional medicine approach,
personalizing and
individualizing
care for something
like either head trauma
or Alzheimer's disease,
very personalized.
And the functional
medicine doctor
will work in conjunction with
someone's primary care provider
so that you have a good
relationship with the one who's
taking care of your general
everyday medical stuff.
>>LISA: You said earlier
that a lot of the Alzheimer's
medications do not work,
which is a strong statement
to say for many people
that are on them.
>>RUSK: I know.
>>LISA: How do you know they
don't work, or many of them?
>>RUSK: Well, the
evidence is that they
don't work to change the
course of the illness.
So they don't change
the progression rate.
Like, if you have a rapidly
progressing illness,
they don't change the
rate of the progression.
They don't stop you
from having the illness.
They don't stop the course
of the illness, either.
What they might do is they might
shorten or give you a few more
months of cognitive clarity,
or they might enhance
your cognition for a while.
>>LISA: Oh, OK.
>>RUSK: And that works for
some people for some months.
But if you went into
any general neurology
clinic or general
practitioner clinic,
they would have to say that they
don't work very well at all.
>>LISA: Well, that's why
there's constant research being
done to see what does work.
>>RUSK: Exactly.
>>LISA: What about for
supplementation for brain
enhancement or memory?
Do you recommend any
supplements for memory?
>>RUSK: Yeah.
In our clinic, we have--
but again, it requires
a root cause looking at,
do you have inflammation?
Are you sensitive to sugars?
How's your gut working?
Do you have candida?
Maybe have a lot of heavy metals
in your body from amalgams
or aluminum or copper or
any of the other metals
that might accumulate.
How's your detox system working?
These are the things that
our doctors check on.
And it's a whole team approach
to taking care of one brain.
>>LISA: That's amazing.
>>RUSK: It's kind of like--
yeah.
But it goes to
show you how, as we
talk about those single,
targeted, silver bullet
strategies drug companies
are looking for,
doesn't it kind of makes sense
that it doesn't make sense,
or that it needs a whole
kind of personalized
individualized
lifestyle approach?
>>LISA: I see what
you're talking about
because if you were to give
somebody just take the vitamin
approach and a
memory supplement,
but yet they have a
lot of information
and they have a lot
of sugar and they're
doing a lot of fear-based
thinking and not
any detoxification, the
supplement's just going
to just be wasted in the body.
>>RUSK: Mm-hmm.
>>LISA: It's going
to get taken over
by all of these other things.
So these are things
everyone can do.
>>RUSK: That's right.
>>LISA: Really, we all can
look at our detoxification.
>>RUSK: That's right.
>>LISA: We can all
look at the things that
are great for our bodies
that have no sugar.
Wheat and dairy to be
concerned about if you
want to really take the
inflammation out of the body,
you can test it yourself.
>>RUSK: That's right.
A lot of these things
you can do at home now.
Just like you could test
for your genetic profiling,
you can also test to see if
your gluten sensitive or not.
Most of our patients are
off of gluten just in case.
>>LISA: Interesting.
>>RUSK: Just because
the current wheat
is not very digestible,
healthy, and tends
to be pro-inflammatory.
>>LISA: The best thing to do
is you could just take yourself
off of that for a couple
of-- maybe a week,
and then see how you feel,
if you're thinking faster,
if you're more agile, if
your body doesn't ache,
if you can spring out
of bed and exercise.
And then if you add it back
into your body, what happens?
>>RUSK: That's right.
You could be your
own experiment.
>>LISA: Easy to do.
>>RUSK: That's right.
And in terms of the supplements,
I just want to say you can just
Google online nootropics,
N-O-O-T-R-O-P-I-C-S.
You can Google.
You can look online and
you can find the ones
that you think makes sense
for you if you don't want
to go to a functional
medicine doctor
or a preventative medicine.
>>LISA: Do you think those work?
What is a nootropics?
>>RUSK: There's a whole
class of supplements now
that are for brain health
and brain enhancement.
But I know that
none of our doctors
just recommend those
because, again, we
can increase the health
of the cells in our brain.
But if we have leaky
gut, then is the medicine
going to go-- is
the supplement going
to go where it needs to go?
If you're supposed to
eat tons of leafy greens
and you do and you're
healing your gut
and you're doing a
few other things,
then that seems like
the more sensible way
to approach root cause rather
than just taking, again,
a supplement thinking it's going
to be a silver bullet targeted
strategy.
>>LISA: So but I
actually want to know,
do you think that
the nootropics work?
Do you think that there
is a possibility of taking
these precursors to
serotonin that could actually
help you release more--
Do you think they
really actually work?
There's a lot of
them on the market.
>>RUSK: There's a lot of
medicines on the market that--
>>LISA: These are supplements.
>>RUSK: Yeah, that's right.
Yeah.
I think some of them do.
I know that we recommend
some just for brain health,
and the Institute for
Functional Medicine
recommends some
for brain health.
I could name some
now, but again,
like if you take something
like rhodiola or bacopa,
they may agree with me
in a very different way
than they agree with you.
So if you're good at
self-monitoring and knowing
this is causing me anxiety.
Is this good because I know
I have a blood sugar problem?
That's why I feel like it's
good to have a health care
partner with whom you do it.
>>LISA: Can something
like, speaking
of blood sugar, hypoglycemia
cause damage in the brain
with the highs and
lows of sugars?
>>RUSK: Yeah.
>>LISA: And diabetes?
I think that one of the subtypes
that we were talking about
earlier relates to
your question now,
and sugar can become a toxin.
And many people are put on
to on ketogenic diet, which
so many people are
talking about right now,
paleo and keto diets.
So many people are
put on ketogenic diets
because it allows the brain
just to work with fats
and not work with sugars.
>>LISA: And do you
recommend that type of diet?
>>RUSK: Yeah.
A lot of our patients are
recommended ketogenic diets
if they have a certain genetic
profile and if they're--
with Alzheimer's disease
and the Bredesen protocol
that subtypes Alzheimer's
disease so beautifully,
that we work with, recommends
ketogenic diet for everyone who
has--
just about everyone.
>>LISA: Because the high
fat, protein, low carb diet.
>>RUSK: Low carb,
no carb, exactly.
And a lot of people who are
very well are going on it
and some people like
to be keto adapted.
That means that they're
adapted to using
their own ketones for energy in
their brain instead of sugar.
But I don't do it.
>>LISA: I heard it not something
you can be on for very long.
>>RUSK: Well, that's the thing.
I think you're right, exactly.
Some people are on it
for long periods of time.
People with Alzheimer's disease
need to be on that diet.
From the evidence
that I've read,
people do very well
on ketogenic diets
if you have Alzheimer's disease.
>>LISA: Fascinating.
>>RUSK: Because they're not
having to deal with the sugar.
>>LISA: So it's basically
really getting off of sugar.
What about caffeine?
>>RUSK: And increasing
fat, fat, fat, fat.
>>LISA: The brain?
>>RUSK: And not just
any fat-- exactly.
>>LISA: Now, is the
brain made up of--
gray matter, but is that
gray matter primarily fat?
>>RUSK: It works with--
the brain needs fat
in order to function.
It needs sugar, too.
But in people who have
neurodegenerative disease,
it is not working properly.
>>LISA: Sugar?
>>RUSK: That's right.
So it's utilizing the fat.
Mm-hmm.
>>LISA: Interesting.
And so it uses fat
in order to what?
Burn energy or--
>>RUSK: Yeah, as
an energy source.
>>LISA: As an energy source.
>>RUSK: Exactly.
>>LISA: And that helps with
the cognitive function.
What about the physical
matter of the brain?
Does the that help with that?
Do you know?
>>RUSK: Well, I don't actually
know what the mechanism is.
I just know that that messages
are sent more efficiently
as an energy source.
I'm trying to think of a
good analogy-- as fuel.
So if it was for
fuel in your car,
then a good way to
look at it would
be if there was fuel
in your car that
wasn't working, if
you had a diesel car,
but you were using regular
fuel, your car really
wouldn't work very well.
>>LISA: A good analogy.
>>RUSK: So for people who have
Alzheimer's disease, using
your fuel to be fat
rather than sugar seems
to be working for many of
the patients on the Bredesen
protocol.
>>LISA: Great to know.
And I'm going to
ask you-- and I do
with all guests-- what is the
biggest reason, your biggest
why that you do what you do?
You obviously love it.
>>RUSK: I love what I do.
It's the why of why I
wake up every morning,
and I do think about
that every morning.
It's because I really care
about the relationship
between mental health
and brain health.
I really care about educating
and dedicating my whole self
to empowering people to love
themselves and take care
of themselves and
to truly believe
that they have a lot of
efficacy in their own lives.
So I also really believe
in knowing your mind
and I encourage people
to know that this
is a bigger journey
for them, my patients,
that this is a healing journey.
And even if they're in a
difficult time in their lives,
that this is part of a bigger
healing journey for them.
And that, indeed,
it's a soul's journey,
that it's not just
a body journey.
It's a soul journey, too.
And trying to put
the pieces together
is kind of my reason for
living in my own life
and in other peoples as well.
>>LISA: So what I've learned
is that exercise is important,
but brain exercise
is just as important.
>>RUSK: Yeah, it really is.
>>LISA: Physical
health is important,
but brain health is a whole
other thing to be focused on.
And it's possible to improve.
>>RUSK: Totally.
>>LISA: That's great.
>>RUSK: With simple
things and connecting.
>>LISA: That we can
always do, and connection.
Thank you so much for
this great information
and teaching us about brain
health and healthy aging
as well.
>>RUSK: It's a pleasure.
It's such a pleasure
to be with you.
Thank you.
>>LISA: And if you
would like to watch
more inspirational
interviews, you
can go to
"Inspirations" on Gaia.
I'm Lisa Garr.
And until next time, I
invite you to stay aware.
[MUSIC PLAYING]